---
title: PREMIER LEAGUE CHAMPIONS!
author: Michael Rose
date: 2017-05-12T23:36:39.686Z
topic: soccer
---

Chelsea are Premier League Champions, yet again! Needless to say I'm thrilled as a supporter. Especially after a bewildering and dismal title defence last season. With Antonio Conte coming in I would have been happy with a top four finish this season, as I'm sure a lot of the Chelsea supporters might have expected. After a slow start, the switch to a 3-4-3 system almost miraculously set us on a 13 game win-streak, which - when it comes down to it - put Chelsea in the driver's seat to lock down the title.

There are some bittersweet events for me this season. The new system means that Ivanovic left, as Marcos Alonso took his place in the starting lineup. Oscar went off to China, John Obi Mikel also left quite recently. With Mikel's departure, John Terry became the only player left in the squad that was there when I started watching the Blues in 2004. And now Terry's leaving at the end of the season. It's the end of an era for sure.

N'Golo Kante winning the PFA Player of the Year Award is something truly special. It's great to see something other than attacking prowess honoured - I think that the rest of the Premier League teams really felt his presence all across the pitch this season. He's the epitome of a holding midfielder; 70% of the Earth is covered by water, and the rest is covered by Kante.

Hazard's return to form this season, with 15 goals so far, and Diego Costa back to 20 goals has helped make last season seem like a distant memory. I'm looking forward to getting back into the Champions League next year, seeing what player's we'll sign, and how the young Chelsea talent we've got a glimpse of this season will play a role.

The potential for the double is strong too - what with Arsenal's inconsistency recently, I like Chelsea's chances in the FA Cup final, especially coming off the high of winning the league. For Conte's first season at Chelsea, two trophies would be incredible.

Man, I've got to see a game at Stamford Bridge! I took a stadium tour there in 2015 and it was a dream come true. It looks like renovations won't be starting there for a while, so I'll be able to get in before they're off to Wembley or somewhere else for at least a season. Maybe next season I'll be able to head to London for a Premier League game on the weekend, and then a home Champions League game during the week? That would be awesome!

Exciting times ahead for Chelsea - Keep The Blue Flag Flying High!
